Aging contributes to an increased risk of developing a number of neurodegenerative and chronic disorders, predominantly related to oxidative stress (OS) and defects in the antioxidant balance. This study focused on the antisenescence effect of four plant species (Falcaria vulgaris, Ixiolirion tataricum, Ajuga chamaecistus, and Scabiosa flavida) on H2 O2 -induced premature senescence in rat NIH3T3 fibroblasts, which were found to be rich in effective phytochemicals with traditional ethnobotanical backgrounds. Plant materials were collected, identified, and extracted. To determine the viability of NIH3T3 cells, an MTT assay was conducted. The levels of OS markers and the senescence-associated ß-galactosidase (SA-ß-GAL) activity were analyzed by the Elisa reader. The cell cycle pattern was evaluated by flow cytometry. The expression of senescence-related inflammatory cytokines and the molecules involved in aging signaling pathways were investigated using the real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). H2 O2 treatment decreased cell viability and increased lipid peroxidation (LPO) and the reactive oxygen species (ROS) in NIH3T3s. However, S. flavida exhibited low cytotoxicity, reduced OS and SA-ß-GAL activities in NIH3T3 cells compared with the H2 O2 -treated group. I. tataricum was the second best plant, although it was more toxic to NIHT3T cells. S. flavida decreased G0/G1 arrest and facilitated the G2/M transition of NIH3T3s, also downregulated the expression of p38, p53, p16, and the related inflammatory mediators. S. flavida potentially modulated senescence-associated hallmarks in fibroblasts exposed to H2 O2 , thus it may inhibit the aging process via controlling the OS. Therefore it is a promising candidate for future antiaging explorations.
Increased activation of the major pro-inflammatory NF-κB pathway leads to numerous age-related diseases, including chronic liver disease (CLD). Rapamycin, an inhibitor of mTOR, extends lifespan and healthspan, potentially via suppression of inflammaging, a process which is partially dependent on NF-κB signalling. However, it is unknown if rapamycin has beneficial effects in the context of compromised NF-κB signalling, such as that which occurs in several age-related chronic diseases. In this study, we investigated whether rapamycin could ameliorate age-associated phenotypes in a mouse model of genetically enhanced NF-κB activity (nfκb1-/- ) characterized by low-grade chronic inflammation, accelerated aging and CLD. We found that, despite showing no beneficial effects in lifespan and inflammaging, rapamycin reduced frailty and improved long-term memory, neuromuscular coordination and tissue architecture. Importantly, markers of cellular senescence, a known driver of age-related pathology, were alleviated in rapamycin-fed animals. Our results indicate that, in conditions of genetically enhanced NF-κB, rapamycin delays aging phenotypes and improves healthspan uncoupled from its role as a suppressor of inflammation.
Over the past years, several studies have found that foods rich in polyphenols protect against age-related disease, such as atherosclerosis, cardiovascular disease, cancer, arthritis, cataracts, osteoporosis, type 2 diabetes (T2D), hypertension and Alzheimer's disease. Resveratrol and pterostilbene, the polyphenol found in grape and blueberries, have beneficial effects as anti-aging compounds through modulating the hallmarks of aging, including oxidative damage, inflammation, telomere attrition and cell senescence. In this review, we discuss the relationship between resveratrol and pterostilbene and possible aging biomarker, including oxidative stress, inflammation, and high-calorie diets. Moreover, we also discuss the positive effect of resveratrol and pterostilbene on lifespan, aged-related disease, and health maintenance. Furthermore, we summarize a variety of important mechanisms modulated by resveratrol and pterostilbene possibly involved in attenuating age-associated disorders. Overall, we describe resveratrol and pterostilbene potential for prevention or treatment of several age-related diseases by modulating age-related mechanisms.
Dry eye, an age-related condition, is a multifactorial disease of the tears and ocular surface that results in symptoms of discomfort, visual disturbance and tear film instability. Environmental factors are also often implicated in dry eye including exposure to pollutants, ultraviolet (UV) radiation and ozone as well as the chronic use of preserved eyedrops such as in the treatment of glaucoma. These factors increase oxidative stress and ocular surface inflammation. Here, we reviewed the cellular, animal and clinical studies that point to the role of oxidative stress in dry eye disease. The biomarkers used to indicate oxidative damage in ocular surface tissues include 8-hydroxy-2 deoxyguanosine (8-OHdG), 4-hydroxynonenal (HNE) and malondialdehyde (MDD). Antioxidative defences in the ocular surface occur in the form of tear proteins such as lactoferrin and S100A proteins, and enzymes such as superoxide dismutase (SOD), peroxidase, catalase and mitochondrial oxidative enzymes. An imbalance between the level of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and the action of protective enzymes will lead to oxidative damage, and possibly inflammation. A small number of interventional studies suggest that oxidative stress may be directly targeted in topical therapy of dry eye treatment. For example, in vitro studies suggest that L-carnitine and pterostilbene, a blueberry component may reduce oxidative stress, and in animal studies, alpha-lipoic acid (ALP) and selenoprotein P may be helpful. Examples of treatments used in clinical trials include vitamin B12 eyedrops and iodide iontophoresis. With recent emphasis on ageing medicine and preventive holistic health, as well as the role of environmental science, research on oxidative stress in the ocular surface is likely to have increasing impact in the coming years.
There is strong evidence that mitochondrial dysfunction mediated oxidative stress results in aging and energy metabolism deficits thus playing a prime role in pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease, neuronal death and cognitive dysfunction. Evidences accrued in empirical studies suggest the antioxidant, anticancer and anti-inflammatory activities of the phytochemical pterostilbene (PTS). PTS also exhibits favourable pharmacokinetic attributes compared to other stilbenes. Hence, in the present study, we explored the neuroprotective role of PTS in ameliorating the intracerebroventricular administered streptozotocin (STZ) induced memory decline in rats. PTS at doses of 10, 30 and 50 mg/kg, was administered orally to STZ administered Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats. The learning and memory tests, Morris water maze test and novel object recognition test were performed which revealed improved cognition on PTS treatment. Further, there was an overall improvement in brain antioxidant parameters like elevated catalase and superoxide dismutase activities, GSH levels, lowered levels of nitrites, lipid peroxides and carbonylated proteins. There was improved cholinergic transmission as evident by decreased acetylcholinesterase activities. The action of ATPases (Na+ K+, Ca2+ and Mg2+) indicating the maintenance of cell membrane potential was also augmented. mRNA expression of battery of genes involved in cellular mitochondrial biogenesis and inflammation showed variations which extrapolate to hike in mitochondrial biogenesis and abated inflammation. The histological findings corroborated the effective role of PTS in countering STZ induced structural aberrations in brain.
BACKGROUND: Environmental conditions or chemical agents can interfere with the function of the endoplasmic reticulum, and the resulting endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress can be toxic to the cell if it is not relieved. The classical compensatory response to ER stress is the unfolded protein response (UPR) that reduces protein load in the ER. However, autophagy may also compensate by removing large insoluble protein aggregates. Agents that stress the ER can have anti-cancer activity, and novel applications of ER stress inducing agents are being investigated. Plant stilbenes are a class of stress responsive molecules that includes resveratrol, which are being investigated as potential therapeutics in humans for conditions such as aging or cancer. RESULTS: We performed a screen of 1726 small, drug like molecules to identify those that could activate an ER-stress responsive luciferase gene. After secondary screening, we determined that the plant stilbenes pterostilbene and piceatannol were the most potent inducers of ER stress from this group. ER stress can be particularly toxic to cells with high ER load, so we examined their effect on cells expressing the Wnt family of secreted glycoprotein growth factors. Molecular analysis determined that these ER stress-inducing stilbenes could block Wnt processing and also induce autophagy in acute lymphoblastic leukemia cells expressing Wnt16. Combining pterostilbene (to induce ER stress) with chloroquine (to inhibit autophagy) lead to significant cellular toxicity in cells from aggressive acute lymphoblastic leukemia. CONCLUSIONS: Plant stilbenes are potent inducers of ER stress. However, their toxicity is more pronounced in cancer cells expressing Wnt growth factors. The toxicity of stilbenes in these ALL cells can be potentiated by the addition of autophagy inhibitors, suggesting a possible therapeutic application.
Increasing evidence suggests that regular consumption of coffee, tea and dark chocolate (cacao) can promote brain health and may reduce the risk of age-related neurodegenerative disorders. However, the complex array of phytochemicals in coffee and cacao beans and tea leaves has hindered a clear understanding of the component(s) that affect neuronal plasticity and resilience. One class of phytochemicals present in relatively high amounts in coffee, tea and cacao are methylxanthines. Among such methylxanthines, caffeine has been the most widely studied and has clear effects on neuronal network activity, promotes sustained cognitive performance and can protect neurons against dysfunction and death in animal models of stroke, Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease. Caffeine's mechanism of action relies on antagonism of various subclasses of adenosine receptors. Downstream xanthine metabolites, such as theobromine and theophylline, may also contribute to the beneficial effects of coffee, tea and cacao on brain health.
Angiogenesis, formation of new blood vessels is an important process involved in neovascular diseases and tumor progression. Understanding and defining novel therapeutic targets of neovascular diseases like retinopathy of prematurity, diabetic retinopathy and age-related macular degeneration have been hindered by a lack of appropriate animal models. Zebrafish provides an excellent vertebrate model to study above disorders since its circulatory system and retinal layers are similar to mammals. Adenosine is a known mediator of angiogenesis in hypoxic condition and adenosine receptor antagonists such as theophylline, theobromine are known to exert antiangiogenic properties. We evaluated the anti-angiogenic potential of a methylxanthine pentoxifylline (PTX) with various concentrations (0.1-1mM) at 50% epiboly stage (5.2 hpf) of zebrafish embryos and studied the mRNA expression of major angiogenic factors like vegfaa and its receptors under normal conditions and when treated with an adenosine analog NECA (5'-N-ethylcarboxamidoadenosine). Upregulation of adenosine receptors, hif-1α and vegfaa by NECA could possibly mimic hypoxic condition, but PTX downregulated vegfaa and other growth factors at 1mM concentration. Vegfa protein expression was also downregulated by PTX in the retina and the compound did not damage the retinal cells. Embryos treated with PTX generated abnormal phenotypic variants with poor vasculature, tail bending and developmental delay at 1mM. Survival rates, heart rate and hatching rates were also significantly lower. Targeting the vegf signaling pathway with small molecules inhibiting adenosine receptors in addition to antagonizing vegf might be a promising approach to treat neovascular diseases of the retina and also tumors.
BACKGROUND: Saccharomyces cerevisiae is a model organism with conserved aging pathways. Yeast chronological lifespan experiments mimic the processes involved in human non-dividing tissues, such as the nervous system or skeletal muscle, and can speed up the search for biomolecules with potential anti-aging effects before proceeding to animal studies. OBJECTIVE: To test the effectiveness of a cocoa polyphenol-rich extract (CPE) in expanding the S. cerevisiae chronological lifespan in two conditions: in the stationary phase reached after glucose depletion and under severe caloric restriction. MEASUREMENTS: Using a high-throughput method, wild-type S. cerevisiae and its mitochondrial manganese-dependent superoxide dismutase null mutant (sod2Δ) were cultured in synthetic complete dextrose medium. After 2 days, 0, 5 and 20 mg/ml of CPE were added, and viability was measured throughout the stationary phase. The effects of the major components of CPE were also evaluated. To determine yeast lifespan under severe caloric restriction conditions, cultures were washed with water 24 h after the addition of 0 and 20 mg/ml of CPE, and viability was followed over time. RESULTS: CPE increased the chronological lifespan of S. cerevisiae during the stationary phase in a dose-dependent manner. A similar increase was also observed in (sod2Δ). None of the major CPE components (theobromine, caffeine, maltodextrin, (-)-epicatechin, (+)-catechin and procyanidin B2) was able to increase the yeast lifespan. CPE further increased the yeast lifespan under severe caloric restriction. CONCLUSION: CPE increases the chronological lifespan of S. cerevisiae through a SOD2-independent mechanism. The extract also extends yeast lifespan under severe caloric restriction conditions. The high-throughput assay used makes it possible to simply and rapidly test the efficacy of a large number of compounds on yeast aging, requiring only small amounts, and is thus a convenient screening assay to accelerate the search for biomolecules with potential anti-aging effects.
RATIONALE: There has recently been increasing interest in the potential of flavanols, plant-derived compounds found in foods such as fruit and vegetables, to ameliorate age-related cognitive decline. Research suggests that cocoa flavanols improve memory and learning, possibly as a result of their anti-inflammatory and neuroprotective effects. These effects may be mediated by increased cerebral blood flow (CBF), thus, stimulating neuronal function. OBJECTIVES: The present study employed arterial spin labelling functional magnetic resonance imaging to explore the effect of a single acute dose of cocoa flavanols on regional CBF. METHODS: CBF was measured pre- and post-consumption of low (23 mg) or high (494 mg) 330 ml equicaloric flavanol drinks matched for caffeine, theobromine, taste and appearance according to a randomized counterbalanced crossover double-blind design in eight males and ten females, aged 50-65 years. Changes in perfusion from pre- to post-consumption were calculated as a function of each drink. RESULTS: Significant increases in regional perfusion across the brain were observed following consumption of the high flavanol drink relative to the low flavanol drink, particularly in the anterior cingulate cortex and the central opercular cortex of the parietal lobe. CONCLUSIONS: Consumption of cocoa flavanol improves regional cerebral perfusion in older adults. This provides evidence for a possible acute mechanism by which cocoa flavanols are associated with benefits for cognitive performance.
The possible modulatory effect of the functional LMN diet, rich in theobromine, polyphenols and polyunsaturated fatty acids, on the catecholaminergic and cholinergic neurotransmission, affecting cognition decline during aging has been studied. 129S1/SvlmJ mice were fed for 10, 20, 30 and 40 days with either LMN or control diets. The enzymes involved in catecholaminergic and cholinergic metabolism were determined by both immunohistological and western blot analyses. Noradrenalin, dopamine and other metabolites were quantified by HPLC analysis. Theobromine, present in cocoa, the main LMN diet component, was analysed in parallel using SH-SY5Y and PC12 cell lines. An enhanced modulatory effect on both cholinergic and catecholaminergic transmissions was observed on 20 day fed mice. Similar effect was observed with theobromine, besides its antioxidant capacity inducing SOD-1 and GPx expression. The enhancing effect of the LMN diet and theobromine on the levels of acetylcholine-related enzymes, dopamine and specially noradrenalin confirms the beneficial role of this diet on the "cognitive reserve" and hence a possible reducing effect on cognitive decline underlying aging and Alzheimer's disease.
Increasing evidence from diverse sources during the past several years has indicated that long-term, low level, chronic inflammation mediates several chronic diseases including cancer, arthritis, obesity, diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, and neurological diseases. The inflammatory molecules and transcription factors, adhesion molecules, AP-1, chemokines, C-reactive protein (CRP), cyclooxygenase (COX)-2, interleukins (ILs), 5-lipooxygenase (5-LOX), matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), nuclear factor (NF)-kB, signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3), tumor necrosis factor (TNF), and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) are molecular links between inflammation and chronic diseases. Thus, suppression of inflammatory molecules could be potential strategy for the prevention and therapy of chronic diseases. The currently available drugs against chronic diseases are highly expensive, minimally effective and produce several side effects when taken for long period of time. The focus of this review is to discuss the potential of nutraceuticals derived from "Mother Nature" such as apigenin, catechins, curcumin, ellagic acid, emodin, epigallocatechin gallate, escin, fisetin, flavopiridol, genistein, isoliquiritigenin, kaempferol, mangostin, morin, myricetin, naringenin, resveratrol, silymarin, vitexin, and xanthohumol in suppression of these inflammatory pathways. Thus, these nutraceuticals offer potential in preventing or delaying the onset of chronic diseases. We provide evidence for the potential of these nutraceuticals from pre-clinical and clinical studies.
Inhibiting the onset of arteriosclerotic disease, which has been increasing due to the westernized diet and aging, is a significant social challenge. Curcumin, a type of polyphenol, has anti-oxidative effects and anti-inflammatory action and is expected to treat and to have prophylactic effects on different diseases. In this study, we examined the effects of long-term administration of curcumin on vascular aging and chronic inflammation-the causes of arteriosclerotic disease. Eight-week-old C57BL/6J mice were fed with high fat diet (HFD) or 0.1% curcumin-mixed HFD (HFD + Cu) until 80 weeks old (n = 20 for each group). After the breeding, we examined the expression of antioxidant enzymes, heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1), oxidative stress, vascular aging, and inflammatory changes in the aorta. In the HFD group, oxidative stress increased with decreased sirt1 expression in the aorta followed by increased senescent cells and enhanced inflammation. Whereas in the HFD + Cu group, HO-1 was induced in the aorta with the suppression of oxidative stress. Additionally, it was shown that sirt1 expression in the aorta in the HFD + Cu group remained at a level comparable to that of the 8-week-old mice with suppression of increased senescent cells and enhanced inflammation. Consequently, disorders associated with HFD were resolved. These results suggest that curcumin might be a food with a prophylactic function against arteriosclerotic disease.
BACKGROUND: Aging is one of the most important inevitable risk factors of Alzheimer disease (AD). Oxidative stress plays a critical role in the process of aging. Curcumin has been proposed to improve neural damage, especially neurodegenerative injury, through its antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties. Therefore, we investigated the effects of curcumin on acrolein-induced AD-like pathologies in HT22 cells. METHODS: HT22 murine hippocampal neuronal cells were treated with 25μM acrolein for 24h with or without pre-treating with curcumin at the selected optimum concentration (5μg/mL) for 30min. Cell viability and apoptosis were measured by CCK8 assay and flow cytometric analysis. Levels of glutathione (GSH), superoxide dismutase (SOD), and malondialdehyde (MDA) were detected by a GSH assay kit or commercial assay kits, respectively. Alterations in the expression of BDNF/TrkB and key enzymes involved in amyloid precursor protein (APP) metabolism were assessed by western blotting. RESULTS: Data showed that curcumin significantly reversed acrolein-induced oxidative stress indicated by depletion of GSH and SOD, and elevation of MDA. The findings also suggested curcumin's potential in protecting HT22 cells against acrolein through regulating the BDNF/TrkB signaling. In addition, acrolein-induced reduction in A-disintegrin and metalloprotease, and the increase of amyloid precursor protein, β-secretase, and receptor for advanced glycation end products were reversed either, and most of them were nearly restored to the control levels by curcumin. CONCLUSION: These findings demonstrate the protective effects of curcumin on acrolein-induced neurotoxicity in vitro, which further suggests its potential role in the treatment of AD.
Curcumin, a natural polyphenolic and yellow pigment obtained from the spice turmeric, has strong antioxidative, anti-inflammatory, and antibacterial properties. Due to these properties, curcumin has been used as a remedy for the prevention and treatment of skin aging and disorders such as psoriasis, infection, acne, skin inflammation, and skin cancer. Curcumin has protective effects against skin damage caused by chronic ultraviolet B radiation. One of the challenges in maximizing the therapeutic potential of curcumin is its low bioavailability, limited aqueous solubility, and chemical instability. In this regard, the present review is focused on recent studies concerning the use of curcumin for the treatment of skin diseases, as well as offering new and efficient strategies to optimize its pharmacokinetic profile and increase its bioavailability.
Curcumin has recently been shown to be a potential treatment for slowing or ameloriating cognitive decline during aging in our nonhuman primate model of normal aging. In these same monkeys, we studied for the first time the neurological impacts of long-term curcumin treatments using longitudinal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Sixteen rhesus monkeys received curcumin or a vehicle control for 14-18 months. We applied a combination of structural and diffusion MRI to determine whether the curcumin resulted in structural or functional changes in focal regions of the brain. The longitudinal imaging revealed decreased microscale diffusivity (mD) measurements mainly in the hippocampus and basal forebrain structures of curcumin treated animals. Changes in generalized fractional anisotropy (GFA) and grey matter density (GMd) measurements indicated an increased grey matter density in cortical ROIs with improved white matter integrity in limbic, cerebellar, and brain stem regions. These findings suggest that noticeable changes in the neuronal environment could be induced from long-term curcumin treatments. Results may provide a neurological basis on the recent findings demonstrating improved spatial working memory and motor function in nonhuman primates.
BACKGROUND: Recent studies suggest curcumin is a promising nutraceutical for improving important clinical and physiological markers of healthy aging, including motor and cognitive function. OBJECTIVE: To determine if curcumin supplementation improves motor and cognitive function in healthy middle-aged and older adults. METHODS: 39 healthy men and postmenopausal women (45-74 yrs) were randomized to 12 weeks of placebo (n = 19) or curcumin supplementation (2000 mg/day Longvida®; n = 20) with motor and cognitive function assessed at week 0 and 12. RESULTS: Using measures of the NIH Toolbox and other standardized tests, there were no changes in muscle strength and rate of torque development, dexterity, fatigability, mobility, endurance, and balance between the placebo and curcumin groups after 12 weeks (all P > 0.05). Additionally, there were no changes after 12 weeks of placebo and curcumin supplementation in measures of fluid cognitive ability, a cognitive domain that declines with age, including processing speed, executive function, working memory, and episodic memory (all P > 0.3). There were marginal changes in language, a measure of crystallized cognitive ability that is stable with age, following the intervention, wherein reading decoding increased 3% in the curcumin group (post: 2428±35 vs. pre: 2357±34, P = 0.003), but was unchanged in the placebo group (post: 2334±39 vs. pre: 2364±40, P = 0.07). CONCLUSIONS: Overall, 12 weeks of curcumin supplementation does not improve motor and cognitive functions in healthy middle-aged and older adults. It is possible that curcumin may enhance these functions in groups with greater baseline impairments than those studied here, including adults greater than 75 years of age and/or patients with clinical disorders.
NAD+ is essential for redox reactions in energy metabolism and necessary for DNA repair and epigenetic modification. Humans require sufficient amounts of dietary niacin (nicotinic acid, nicotinamide, and nicotinamide riboside) for adequate NAD+ synthesis. In contrast, mice easily generate sufficient NAD+ solely from tryptophan through the kynurenine pathway. We show that transgenic mice with inducible expression of human alpha-amino-beta-carboxy-muconate-semialdehyde decarboxylase (ACMSD) become niacin dependent similar to humans when ACMSD expression is high. On niacin-free diets, these acquired niacin dependency (ANDY) mice developed reversible, mild-to-severe NAD+ deficiency, depending on the nutrient composition of the diet. NAD deficiency in mice contributed to behavioral and health changes that are reminiscent of human niacin deficiency. This study shows that ACMSD is a key regulator of mammalian dietary niacin requirements and NAD+ metabolism and that the ANDY mouse represents a versatile platform for investigating pathologies linked to low NAD+ levels in aging and neurodegenerative diseases.
Background: Skeletal muscle aging is marked by the development of a sarcopenic phenotype, a global decline of muscle energetic capacities, and an intolerance to exercise. Among the metabolic disorders involved in this syndrome, NAD metabolism was shown to be altered in skeletalmuscle, with an important role for the NAMPT enzyme recycling the nicotinamide precursor. An alternative pathway for NAD biosynthesis has been described for the nicotinamide riboside vitamin B3 precursor used by the NMRK kinases, including the striated muscle-specific NMRK2. Aim: With this study, our goal is to explore the ability of 16-month-old Nmrk2 -/- mice to perform endurance exercise and study the consequences on muscle adaptation to exercise. Methods: 10 control and 6 Nmrk2 -/- mice were used and randomly assigned to sedentary and treadmill endurance training groups. After 9 weeks of training, heart and skeletal muscle samples were harvested and used for gene expression analysis, NAD levels measurements and immunohistochemistry staining. Results: Endurance training triggered a reduction in the expression of Cpt1b and AcadL genes involved in fatty acid catabolism in the heart of Nmrk2 -/- mice, not in control mice. NAD levels were not altered in heart or skeletal muscle, nor at baseline neither after exercise training in any group. Myh7 gene encoding for the slow MHC-I was more strongly induced by exercise in Nmrk2 -/- mice than in controls. Moreover, IL-15 expression levels is higher in Nmrk2 -/- mice skeletal muscle at baseline compared to controls. No fiber type switch was observed in plantaris after exercise, but fast fibers diameter was reduced in aged control mice, not in Nmrk2 -/- mice. No fiber type switch or diameter modification was observed in soleus muscle. Conclusion: In this study, we demonstrated for the first time a phenotype in old Nmrk2 -/- mice in response to endurance exercise training. Although NMRK2 seems to be predominantly dispensable to maintain global NAD levels in heart and skeletal muscle, we demonstrated a maladaptive metabolic response to exercise in cardiac and skeletal muscle, showing that NMRK2 has a specific and restricted role in NAD signaling compared to the NAMPT pathway.
While mitochondrial dysfunction is emerging as key in Parkinson's disease (PD), a central question remains whether mitochondria are actual disease drivers and whether boosting mitochondrial biogenesis and function ameliorates pathology. We address these questions using patient-derived induced pluripotent stem cells and Drosophila models of GBA-related PD (GBA-PD), the most common PD genetic risk. Patient neurons display stress responses, mitochondrial demise, and changes in NAD+ metabolism. NAD+ precursors have been proposed to ameliorate age-related metabolic decline and disease. We report that increasing NAD+ via the NAD+ precursor nicotinamide riboside (NR) significantly ameliorates mitochondrial function in patient neurons. Human neurons require nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase (NAMPT) to maintain the NAD+ pool and utilize NRK1 to synthesize NAD+ from NAD+ precursors. Remarkably, NR prevents the age-related dopaminergic neuronal loss and motor decline in fly models of GBA-PD. Our findings suggest NR as a viable clinical avenue for neuroprotection in PD and other neurodegenerative diseases.
Mitochondria are the powerhouses of the cell as well as the primary site of hematopoiesis, which also occurs in the cytoplasm. Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) are characterized by a very high turnover rate, and are thus considered to be relatively free from the age-related insults generated by mitochondria. However, HSCs are also subject to these age-related insults, including the incidence of myeloid proliferative diseases, marrow failure, hematopoietic neoplasms, and deterioration of the adaptive human immune system. Recently, NAD⁺ dietary supplements, known as niacin or vitamin B₃, including tryptophan, nicotinic acid, nicotinamide, and the newly identified NAD⁺ precursor nicotinamide riboside, have been shown to play a role in restoring adult stem cell function through the amelioration of mitochondrial dysfunction. This insight motivated a study that focused on reversing aging-related cellular dysfunction in adult mouse muscle stem cells by supplementing their diet with nicotinamide riboside. The remedial effect of nicotinamide riboside enhanced mitochondrial function in these muscle stem cells in a SIRT1-dependent manner, affecting cellular respiration, membrane potential, and production of ATP. Accordingly, numerous studies have demonstrated that sirtuins, under nuclear/mitochondrial control, have age-specific effects in determining HSC phenotypes. Based on the evidence accumulated thus far, we propose a clinical intervention for the restoration of aged HSC function by improving mitochondrial function through NAD⁺ precursor supplementation.
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD +) biosynthesis and its regulation have recently been attracting markedly increasing interest. Aging is marked by a systemic decrease in NAD + across multiple tissues. The dysfunction of NAD + biosynthesis plays a critical role in the pathophysiologies of multiple diseases, including age-associated metabolic disorders, neurodegenerative diseases, and mental disorders. As downstream effectors, NAD +-dependent enzymes, such as sirtuins, are involved in the progression of such disorders. These recent studies implicate NAD + biosynthesis as a potential target for preventing and treating age-associated diseases. Indeed, new studies have demonstrated the therapeutic potential of supplementing NAD + intermediates, such as nicotinamide mononucleotide and nicotinamide riboside, providing a proof of concept for the development of an effective anti-aging intervention.
NAD+ is a co-enzyme in redox reactions and a substrate required for activity of various enzyme families, including sirtuins and poly(ADP-ribose) polymerases. Dietary supplementation of NAD+ precursors nicotinamide mononucleotide (NMN) or nicotinamide riboside (NR) protects against metabolic disease, neurodegenerative disorders and age-related physiological decline in mammals. Here we sought to identify the roles of nicotinamide riboside kinase 1 (NRK1) plays in regulating hepatic NAD+ biosynthesis and lipid metabolism. Using adenovirus mediated gene transduction to overexpress or knockdown NRK1 in mouse liver, we have demonstrated that NRK1 is critical for maintaining hepatic NAD+ levels and triglyceride content. We have further shown that the hepatic expression of Nmrk1 mRNA is significantly decreased either in mice treated with high-fat diet or in aged mice. However, adenoviral delivery of NRK1 in these diet- and age-induced mice elevates hepatic NAD+ levels, reduces hepatic steatosis, and improves glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity. Our results provide important insights in targeting NRK1 for treating hepatic steatosis.
BACKGROUND: Senolytic drugs are thought to target senescent cells and might thereby rejuvenate tissues. In fact, such compounds were suggested to increase health and lifespan in various murine aging models. So far, effects of senolytic drugs have not been analysed during replicative senescence of human mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs). METHODS: In this study, we tested four potentially senolytic drugs: ABT-263 (navitoclax), quercetin, nicotinamide riboside, and danazol. The effects of these compounds were analysed during long-term expansion of MSCs, until replicative senescence. Furthermore, we determined the effect on molecular markers for replicative senescence, such as senescence-associated beta-galactosidase staining (SA-β-gal), telomere attrition, and senescence-associated DNA methylation changes. RESULTS: Co-culture experiments of fluorescently labelled early and late passages revealed that particularly ABT-263 had a significant but moderate senolytic effect. This was in line with reduced SA-β-gal staining in senescent MSCs upon treatment with ABT-263. However, none of the drugs had significant effects on the maximum number of population doublings, telomere length, or epigenetic senescence predictions. CONCLUSIONS: Of the four tested drugs, only ABT-263 revealed a senolytic effect in human MSCs-and even treatment with this compound did not rejuvenate MSCs with regard to telomere length or epigenetic senescence signature. It will be important to identify more potent senolytic drugs to meet the high hopes for regenerative medicine.
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) has emerged as a critical co-substrate for enzymes involved in the beneficial effects of regular calorie restriction on healthspan. As such, the use of NAD+ precursors to augment NAD+ bioavailability has been proposed as a strategy for improving cardiovascular and other physiological functions with aging in humans. Here we provide the evidence in a 2 × 6-week randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover clinical trial that chronic supplementation with the NAD+ precursor vitamin, nicotinamide riboside (NR), is well tolerated and effectively stimulates NAD+ metabolism in healthy middle-aged and older adults. Our results also provide initial insight into the effects of chronic NR supplementation on physiological function in humans, and suggest that, in particular, future clinical trials should further assess the potential benefits of NR for reducing blood pressure and arterial stiffness in this group.
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) has emerged as a critical co-substrate for enzymes involved in the beneficial effects of regular calorie restriction on healthspan. As such, the use of NAD+ precursors to augment NAD+ bioavailability has been proposed as a strategy for improving cardiovascular and other physiological functions with aging in humans. Here we provide the evidence in a 2 × 6-week randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover clinical trial that chronic supplementation with the NAD+ precursor vitamin, nicotinamide riboside (NR), is well tolerated and effectively stimulates NAD+ metabolism in healthy middle-aged and older adults. Our results also provide initial insight into the effects of chronic NR supplementation on physiological function in humans, and suggest that, in particular, future clinical trials should further assess the potential benefits of NR for reducing blood pressure and arterial stiffness in this group.
